Creative thinking is the ability to think differently: to see a problem or issue from a new angle or perspective. This often allows you find a new solution.

The need for creative thinking arises because our brains naturally tend to fall into certain ‘short cuts’. Once we have a piece of information, we tend to use it again: that’s how we learn. This has huge advantages—for example, it means that we don’t have to learn how to use a knife and fork every time we eat—but it also has some disadvantages, in that we tend to stop thinking about things that we do, see or say regularly.

There are some people who simply fizz with new ideas and seem to see everything slightly differently from those around them

Why?’, and ‘Why not?’

When you are facing a major problem or issue, and you cannot see an obvious way forward.


When you need something new, that hasn’t been tried before, but you are not sure w


 

Divergent Thinking: free-form way of problem solving . creating multiple, unique ideas or solutions to a problem that you are trying to solve. 

Lateral Thinking: Lateral thinking refers to providing  creative solutions that cannot be figured out by deductive or logical solutions. Basically, it’s thinking outside of the box! . Exploring new ideas, thinking outside the box.


Inspirational Thinking: Lightbulb moments inspired by great personalities or insightful thoughts

Abstract Thinking: Abstract thinking is the most important thinking ability of our engineers. 

Because software technology is essentially an abstract art. Abstraction is the process of extracting common and essential characteristics from many things, 
and discarding their non-essential characteristics. 

Design Thinking: Applying strategy, problem-solving and decision-making to the process of design


THE IMPORTANCE OF CREATIVE THINKING
IT IS INDISPENSABLE
The world has taken a technological leap. Today, robots click photographs. Yet, some photographs stand out because they reflect the mind and intent of a talented professional.

Jobs in many industries have been replaced by automation. Still, creative thinkers are in high demand because originality is irreplaceable. Creative thinking is indispensable.

IT GIVES YOU FREEDOM
You must have noticed how a child’s imagination soars boundlessly. Children are naturally creative thinkers because they haven’t been bound by the ways of the world just yet.  Creative thinking thrives when individuals and groups are free of artificially-imposed constraints.

Set your mind free to explore other perspectives, ‘the other side’. Then, deploy your ideas into your endeavors and see the difference. You must have heard how famous filmmakers and music directors go to hill stations or remote places to brainstorm, write and compose. To get work done, many writers prefer the quiet of country-side living to the clutter of cities.

IT IMPROVES THE PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS
Sunil was his boss’s favorite assistant because he was an efficient problem-solver. With his creative thinking skills, he always found a solution to any unforeseen problem.

The importance of creative thinking in problem-solving is crucial. It enables you to face a challenge and think about it from all angles.

IT ADDS TO LEADERSHIP QUALITIES
Throughout history, inspiring leaders from various walks of life have been included in creative thinker examples. They achieve the highest level of excellence on the back of extraordinary ideas that have the potential to change the course of history, art, or a nation.

Take, for instance, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Mahatma Gandhi, JRD Tata, Swami Vivekanand, Satyajit Ray. These creative minds have left indelible imprints in their chosen area of work.

IT BOOSTS PRODUCTIVITY
Steve Jobs is considered one of the striking creative thinker examples. The Apple co-founder had a vision that transformed people’s lives with several mini-revolutions: beginning with the personal computer and then going on to the iPod and, later, the iPhone.

Steven Spielberg’s work heralded a new era in filmmaking. Albert Einstein pushed the boundaries of accepted thinking with his own ideas.  ‘Logic will get you from A to B. Imagination will take you everywhere,’ he said.

A workplace that encourages creativity is a productive workplace. Encouraging creativity leads to more innovative ideas, less fear of failure, and greater emotional investment.

IT MAKES PEOPLE HAPPIER
Giving people a free hand to apply their creative thinking makes them happy. It gives them a sense of being unshackled from barriers.  Such liberation yields more constructive results in the workplace. You must have noticed that you work better in a place where you are appreciated and valued.

Filmmaker Walt Disney chased his dream to make people happy through entertainment.  He came up with a word that typifies his vision: Imagineering, that is imagination plus engineering. For Disney, it was fun to attempt the impossible. Yet another one of the fascinating creative thinker examples!

IT LEADS TO PERSONAL GROWTH
Those who have bigger dreams and long-term goals should never underestimate the importance of creative thinking. It pushes you out of your comfort zone and transports you into a creative zone.

The more you create, the more you grow in terms of mindset as well as skill sets. Also, when you commit time to pursue your passions, the quality of your life goes up.

All creative thinker examples prove that such ability empowers and elevates your career graph. In the process, you obtain valuable insights about yourself.

You discover your habits, dreams, desires, and impulses. You learn to value yourself and express it in your creative output.

For it to be a high-reward endeavor, build your creative skills systematically. It’s true that some people are born with inherent creative strengths. But it’s also true that creativity can be sown and nurtured with strategy and practice.

HOW TO ENHANCE YOUR CREATIVE THINKING?
Pay attention to your strengths and try to incorporate more of them in your life

Think differently. Do not restrict yourself to a habitual pattern.  

Be curious  about your surroundings. Keep learning

Don’t hesitate to take risks

Get rid of the negative attitudes that are blocking your creativity

Involve in brainstorming to inspire new ideas

Accept that a problem can have multiple solutions and explore every possibility


